The Road to Serfdom 

with The Intellectuals and Socialism 



The Road to Serfdom 

with The Intellectuals and Socialism 

FRIEDRICH A. HAYEK 

THE CONDENSED VERSION OF THE ROAD TO SERFDOM 
BY F. A. HAYEK AS IT APPEARED IN THE APRIL 1945 
EDITION OF READER'S DIGEST 



iea 

The Institute of Economic Affairs 



This combined edition first published in Great Britain in 2005 by 
The Institute of Economic Affairs 
2 Lord North Street 

Westminster 
London SWiP 3LB 
in association with Profile Books Ltd 

This condensed version of The Road to Serfdom was first published in Great Britain in 1999 
in the 'Rediscovered Riches' series by The Institute of Economic Affairs, and reissued as 
Occasional Paper 122 in 2001 

This condensed version of The Road to Serfdom © Reader's Digest, 
reproduced by kind permission 

The Road to Serfdom is published in all territories outside the USA by Routledge. 
This version is published by kind permission. 

'The Intellectuals and Socialism' previously published in Great Britain in 1998 in the 
'Rediscovered Riches' series by the Institute of Economic Affairs 

'The Intellectuals and Socialism' © The University of Chicago Law Review 1949. 
Reproduced by kind permission. 

All other material copyright © The Institute of Economic Affairs 2005 

Every effort has been made to contact the copyright holders associated with this edition. 
The IEA will be pleased to include any corrections in future printings. 

The mission of the Institute of Economic Affairs is to improve public understanding of 
the fundamental institutions of a free society, with particular reference to the role of 
markets in solving economic and social problems. 

The moral right of the authors has been asserted. 

All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part 
of this publication may be reproduced, stored or introduced into a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright 
owner and the publisher of this book. 

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 

ISBN 0 255 36576 4 

Many IEA publications are translated into languages other than English or are reprinted. 
Permission to translate or to reprint should be sought from the Director General at the 
address above. 

Typeset in Stone by MacGuru 
info@macguru.org.uk 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Hobbs the Printers 



CONTENTS 



The authors 7 

Foreword by Walter E. Williams 1 0 

THE ROAD TO SERFDOM 

Foreword by Edwin J. Feulner Jr 1 9 
Introduction: Hayek, Fisher and The Road to Serfdom 

by John Blundell 22 
Preface to the Reader's Digest condensed version of 

The Road to Serfdom 34 

Summary 35 

The Road to Serfdom (condensed version) 39 
